so David in the first Ted Talk you gave
you had this phrase that you quoted
really from Stephen Hawking Stephen
Hawking referred to humans as basically
chemical scum on the surface of an
obscure planet and that's actually quite
a common view of how science is thought
of as treating humans you know we
started thinking we were the scent of
everything and then we gradually
discovered that no we're just a planet
revolving around a star and then that
star is just one of 100 billion in a
galaxy and that Galaxy is one of
hundreds of billions of other galaxies
and goodness knows we become very
quickly completely insignificant
you I think disagree with that
characterization explain why and you're
right that that's the prevailing View
because that's the view that's kind of
forced on us by a narrow conception of
what science is
according to that view
you classify things in the universe in a
sort of hierarchy of more massive and
Powerful versus less massive and so on
and so we're used to the fact that the
big objects like the supermassive black
holes in in the center of a galaxy
affect a star can rip a star to Pieces
but the star being ripped to pieces
hardly affects the supermassive black
hole and it's the same with the sun and
the solar system you know the sun
affects the Earth but the Earth barely
affects the Sun and so on but the funny
thing is on Earth on the surface of the
Earth
everything's the other way around
everywhere you look you see the effects
of life on Earth and life
every living thing that you see is is
the result of the action of a single
molecule or two molecules or something
depending on what kind of
um organism it is so this submicroscopic
entity
commands vast resources now humans take
this to our wholly different level where
we are capable of becoming cosmically
significant not just dominating the
surface of a planet but dominating the
Galaxy and further out
well how's that you mean by by kind of
Star Trek like exploration or something
else yes Star Trek or rather
colonization
it's it's what we do
um humans evolved unlike all other
existing organisms
to find new
environments which are initially lethal
to them and to change the environment
such that they can live comfortably
there
I am sitting in Oxford
and if it weren't for technology I would
die
within hours
because without clothes Without Shelter
without medical attention without
sources of food from far away I would be
very hard put to it to forage and the
the territory here supported only a tiny
number of people in the early days of
our species whereas now it supports tens
of millions and so the difference
between your survival and otherwise is
human knowledge turned into technology
which has built you know the house the
central heating the clothes and so forth
that that keep you alive yes
fundamentally it's knowledge and I mean
when you talk about you know like that
humans can have indefinite impact on the
universe through Star Trek like
expansion out like at first glance a lot
of people listening to that will say
well already that's sounding a little
silly that's science fiction in any way
and and how can that possibly mean much
but your whole second book this idea of
the beginning of infinity is arguing
that knowledge in principle has infinite
reach and therefore if you don't include
that in your world view you are missing
out on something fundamentally important
so talk a bit more about how we could
think of that reach of knowledge perhaps
it's uh more Illuminating to think of
this the other way around so Suppose
there were some extraterrestrial beings
intelligent beings looking around at the
stars from let's say a hundred light
years away or something in the galaxy
and they would see various stars and
they they might use astrophysics to
predict what these Stars will do but on
Earth they would detect something
for example the fact that there's oxygen
in the atmosphere which tells them that
there's life here
and then they would detect if if they
kept watching the ass for a while I mean
I'm kind of imagining them with
technology similar to ours they could
detect more if they had better
technology but if they watch the Earth
for a couple of decades they would see
that the mean temperature of the planet
is changing faster than it possibly
could
only artificial intervention can change
the temperature of the earth as fast as
it has been changing this is
inexplicable without the presence of
intelligent beings and if they then ask
themselves well this influence the
influence that affected the atmosphere
of that planet
could it possibly affect us and the
answer is yes because
the issue of whether a spaceship can get
there
is a matter of what we decide to do and
it's also a matter of the laws of
physics
so David I think it's important almost
having this conversation to you know
bear in mind that the way you think but
by thinking in sort of theoretical terms
about what knowledge might in principle
one day do that has implications for how
we should think of human beings and um
our role in the world and so when we
talk about aliens and we talk about
um you know the potential for
exploration you're not saying that hey
this is going to happen anytime soon
what you're saying is it is in principle
possible for this species that has
evolved on Earth
to have a future that is imaginable it
may not happen but it is imaginable
where it can become indefinitely more
influential in our solar system
eventually maybe our galaxy it may be
beyond that and so it's it's that fact
that that is possible in principle
which creates this anchor this
fundamental idea that knowledge there's
no limit to how powerful an influence it
can eventually have starting with Oxford
and Central Heating and moving out in
theory indefinitely Beyond and that that
is a remarkable fact that needs
explaining
yes uh I mean you asked about the cosmic
significance so the answer that I give
to explain it in some sense must involve
things Beyond everyday life but everyday
life as we see it would have been
regarded as completely magical even a
few centuries ago let alone for the most
of the period of the human species for
example you know I I can sit in Oxford
and look a bit beyond my house and look
up in the sky and I see an airplane
there now the fact that a metallic
object weighing a hundred tons is flying
there at 500 miles an hour and has come
from another continent that is as much
of a jump from natural
human beings as what we're discussing
this kind of space travel space
exploration is from where we are now in
in fact I think comparing those two I I
I guess we have already come further in
terms of knowledge than what lies
between us and space exploration I'm not
saying exploring the Galaxy that would
require more knowledge but that's all it
requires you know if if you're a
scientist and you're asked is so and so
possible you have to use the laws of
nature you can't say well my intuition
is that that will never happen because
our knowledge of the laws of nature is
far superior to our intuition